README.md, before:

# PSAND: Planetary Structure ANd Dynamics
A python method to couple planetary structure and dynamics, as published in [Hallatt & Millholland (2025)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250922923H/abstract).

If you use PSAND, please cite [Hallatt & Millholland (2025)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250922923H/abstract).

The structure grids cover temperatures 288-2884 K, core masses {10, 20} Earth masses, total masses [10.1,300] Earth masses, and "metallicities" (assumed SiO2) {0.02,0.1,0.5}.

Data files for interpolation take up 117 MB (compressed) / 538 MB (uncompressed).

Please reach out to me if you would like to collaborate, have questions, or if you would like custom structure models to be created. I can be reached at thallatt@mit.edu.

## A minimal working example

This example loads our interpolation functions assuming solar composition gas, and a 10 Earth mass core. We set the irradiation temperature to 289 K and the total planet mass to 250 Earth masses. We integrate equation 5 from Hallatt & Millholland (2025). We then plot the entropy, luminosity, and radius as a function of time.

```python
import numpy as np
from scipy.integrate import solve_ivp
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# import supermongo python plotting library (https://github.com/AstroJacobLi/smplotlib)
import smplotlib

# define constants (cgs units)
yr = 31560000.0
kB = 1.3807e-16
mH = 1.6726e-24
sigSB = 5.67e-5
RE = 637800000.0

# core mass identifier string
mc = '10'
# metallicity string ('002': Z=0.02, '05': Z=0.5)
z = '002'

# load interpolation functions for planet structure
fTdm = np.load('data/fTm_mc'+mc+'_z'+z+'.npy',allow_pickle=True).item()
fL = np.load('data/fL_mc'+mc+'_z'+z+'.npy',allow_pickle=True).item()
fR = np.load('data/fR_mc'+mc+'_z'+z+'.npy',allow_pickle=True).item()

# define extra heating rate (erg/s) as a function of time (s). for this example, we set it to zero.
def Lx(t):
  return 0.

# evolve planet entropy by "stepping through the adiabats" (equation 5 of Hallatt & Millholland (2025)).
def dSdtm(S,Lextra_,M,Tirr):
  return (-fL(S,M,Tirr) + Lextra_)/fTdm(S,M,Tirr)

# differential equation to be solved with scipy
def fevo(t,y):
  S = y[0]
  Lextra = Lx(t)
  dsdt = dSdtm(S,Lextra,M,Tirr)
  return [dsdt]

# planet mass, initial entropy, Tirr (constant for this example)
M = 250      # ME
S0 = 10      # kB/mH
Tirr = 289   # 288 K is the current minimum

# set time range
t0, tend = 1e6, 1e10
S0 = 10.

# output name
outname = '250ME_Lx0'

# integrate thermal evolution!
sol = solve_ivp(fevo, [t0*yr,tend*yr], [S0*kB/mH])

# save output from our integration
Sout = sol.y[0]
Rout = fR(Sout,M,Tirr)
Lout = fL(Sout,M,Tirr)

# plot output
fig, (ax1,ax2,ax3) = plt.subplots(1,3,figsize=(10, 4))

ax1.set_ylabel(r'$S$ [$k_{\rm B}/m_{\rm H}$]')
ax1.set_xlabel('time [yr]')
ax1.semilogx(sol.t/yr, Sout/(kB/mH))
ax1.set_xticks([1e6,1e7,1e8,1e9,1e10])
ax1.set_ylim(6,11)
ax1.set_yticks(np.arange(6,12))

ax2.set_ylabel(r'log $L$ [erg/s]')
ax2.set_xlabel('time [yr]')
ax2.loglog(sol.t/yr, np.log10(Lout))
ax2.set_xticks([1e6,1e7,1e8,1e9,1e10])
ax2.set_ylim(24,30)
ax2.set_yticks(np.arange(24,31))

ax3.set_ylabel(r'R [R$_\oplus$]')
ax3.set_xlabel('time [yr]')
ax3.semilogx(sol.t/yr, Rout)
ax3.set_xticks([1e6,1e7,1e8,1e9,1e10])

fig.tight_layout()
fig.savefig('SLR_'+outname+'.pdf',bbox_inches='tight')
```
![example_evolution](SLR_250ME_Lx0.png "example_evolution")

Commit message:

Update S0 description in README
Clarified S0 variable description regarding maximum entropy based on metallicity.

README.md, after:

# PSAND: Planetary Structure ANd Dynamics
A python method to couple planetary structure and dynamics, as published in [Hallatt & Millholland (2025)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250922923H/abstract).

If you use PSAND, please cite [Hallatt & Millholland (2025)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250922923H/abstract).

The structure grids cover temperatures 288-2884 K, core masses {10, 20} Earth masses, total masses [10.1,300] Earth masses, and "metallicities" (assumed SiO2) {0.02,0.1,0.5}.

Data files for interpolation take up 117 MB (compressed) / 538 MB (uncompressed).

Please reach out to me if you would like to collaborate, have questions, or if you would like custom structure models to be created. I can be reached at thallatt@mit.edu.

## A minimal working example

This example loads our interpolation functions assuming solar composition gas, and a 10 Earth mass core. We set the irradiation temperature to 289 K and the total planet mass to 250 Earth masses. We integrate equation 5 from Hallatt & Millholland (2025). We then plot the entropy, luminosity, and radius as a function of time.

```python
import numpy as np
from scipy.integrate import solve_ivp
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# import supermongo python plotting library (https://github.com/AstroJacobLi/smplotlib)
import smplotlib

# define constants (cgs units)
yr = 31560000.0
kB = 1.3807e-16
mH = 1.6726e-24
sigSB = 5.67e-5
RE = 637800000.0

# core mass identifier string
mc = '10'
# metallicity string ('002': Z=0.02, '05': Z=0.5)
z = '002'

# load interpolation functions for planet structure
fTdm = np.load('data/fTm_mc'+mc+'_z'+z+'.npy',allow_pickle=True).item()
fL = np.load('data/fL_mc'+mc+'_z'+z+'.npy',allow_pickle=True).item()
fR = np.load('data/fR_mc'+mc+'_z'+z+'.npy',allow_pickle=True).item()

# define extra heating rate (erg/s) as a function of time (s). for this example, we set it to zero.
def Lx(t):
  return 0.

# evolve planet entropy by "stepping through the adiabats" (equation 5 of Hallatt & Millholland (2025)).
def dSdtm(S,Lextra_,M,Tirr):
  return (-fL(S,M,Tirr) + Lextra_)/fTdm(S,M,Tirr)

# differential equation to be solved with scipy
def fevo(t,y):
  S = y[0]
  Lextra = Lx(t)
  dsdt = dSdtm(S,Lextra,M,Tirr)
  return [dsdt]

# planet mass, initial entropy, Tirr (constant for this example)
M = 250      # ME
S0 = 10      # kB/mH; note that the maximum entropy in the grid depends on metallicity (Smax=10.9 for Z=0.02, Smax=7.6 for Z=0.5)
Tirr = 289   # 288 K is the current minimum

# set time range
t0, tend = 1e6, 1e10
S0 = 10.

# output name
outname = '250ME_Lx0'

# integrate thermal evolution!
sol = solve_ivp(fevo, [t0*yr,tend*yr], [S0*kB/mH])

# save output from our integration
Sout = sol.y[0]
Rout = fR(Sout,M,Tirr)
Lout = fL(Sout,M,Tirr)

# plot output
fig, (ax1,ax2,ax3) = plt.subplots(1,3,figsize=(10, 4))

ax1.set_ylabel(r'$S$ [$k_{\rm B}/m_{\rm H}$]')
ax1.set_xlabel('time [yr]')
ax1.semilogx(sol.t/yr, Sout/(kB/mH))
ax1.set_xticks([1e6,1e7,1e8,1e9,1e10])
ax1.set_ylim(6,11)
ax1.set_yticks(np.arange(6,12))

ax2.set_ylabel(r'log $L$ [erg/s]')
ax2.set_xlabel('time [yr]')
ax2.loglog(sol.t/yr, np.log10(Lout))
ax2.set_xticks([1e6,1e7,1e8,1e9,1e10])
ax2.set_ylim(24,30)
ax2.set_yticks(np.arange(24,31))

ax3.set_ylabel(r'R [R$_\oplus$]')
ax3.set_xlabel('time [yr]')
ax3.semilogx(sol.t/yr, Rout)
ax3.set_xticks([1e6,1e7,1e8,1e9,1e10])

fig.tight_layout()
fig.savefig('SLR_'+outname+'.pdf',bbox_inches='tight')
```
![example_evolution](SLR_250ME_Lx0.png "example_evolution")
